RIO DE JANEIRO — Brazilian authorities released a Facebook executive from custody here on Wednesday after a judge overturned an order that led to his arrest one day earlier.

Diego Dzodan, a Facebook vice president based in São Paulo, was freed around midday, according to a court spokesman. He had been held overnight at a provisional detention center in São Paulo, awaiting transfer to the northeastern state of Sergipe.

On Tuesday, the Brazilian federal police arrested Mr. Dzodan, an Argentine, after the company did not hand over information from a WhatsApp messaging account. The information had been requested by a judge in Sergipe as part of a drug trafficking investigation.

The federal police said the arrest was made because Facebook, which owns WhatsApp, repeatedly failed to comply with judicial orders.

After the arrest, the company filed a habeas corpus petition that was reviewed and granted by a judge in Sergipe’s highest state court early Wednesday, leading to Mr. Dzodan’s release.

That judge, Ruy Pinheiro, said he considered the arrest of Mr. Dzodan to be “an extreme measure,” according to a court statement.

Judge Pinheiro noted that the Facebook executive was not part of the police investigation. He said that “no concrete proof” existed that Mr. Dzodan had blocked or impeded the investigation.

Wednesday’s ruling in no way signals an end to the challenges Facebook and other Internet companies face here.

Judge Pinheiro ruled only on whether it was appropriate to arrest and detain Mr. Dzodan, not on the merits of the larger judicial case for seeking user information from the company, according to a Sergipe court spokesman. The orders still stand, and Facebook could continue to face fines if it does not comply with them.

Facebook continues to contend that it is not able to provide the requested information because WhatsApp does not store users’ messages. It also increasingly has end-to-end encryption.

In a statement, Facebook said, “Diego’s detention was an extreme, disproportionate measure, and we are pleased to see the court in Sergipe issue an injunction ordering his release.”

The company called the arrest “capricious” but said it was willing to cooperate with officials. “We remain willing to address questions Brazilian authorities may have,” it said.