If you wanted to get a glimpse of how hard Facebook can fight when pressed against the wall — a hint of its war chest, the scope of its ambition to access and connect the developing world — take a drive around Mumbai, India’s financial capital, as 2015 turned into 2016.

Everywhere: the billboards. Along the freeway under the smoggy haze. Emblazoned on bus stops — “A Billion Reasons to Support Digital Equality” and an image of an outmoded cellphone. On a busy shopping street, a sign reading “A First Step Towards Digital Equality,” picturing two young women in saris, chatting while looking at a cellphone. The ads ran for two weeks in six cities.

Also everywhere: the newspaper ads, full-page ads — double full-page ads! — featuring Indian farmers and henna-adorned hands and stories of Facebook allowing unconnected people to go online. A full-page op-ed in the Times of India by Mark Zuckerberg himself, in which he asked, “Who could possibly be against this?”

The campaign was to save Free Basics, a Facebook program that gives access to a limited number of websites — including, of course, Facebook — free of charge in 37 developing countries and counting. As of a year ago, Facebook’s telecom partner Reliance Communications allowed mobile subscribers in India to surf sites pre-approved by Facebook without needing a data plan. It’s a central tenet of Internet.org, the division of Facebook charged with connecting the entire world to the internet, and a key part of Zuckerberg’s intended legacy. It’s also Facebook’s entry into Silicon Valley’s good-for-us, good-for-the-world brand of philanthropy, and another way to compete with Microsoft (hooking up developing countries with internet via solar panels and grants), Google (with Project Loon balloons) and Elon Musk’s SpaceX (with satellites).
An ad for Free Basics in Bangalore, featuring a moon-walking glove hand

Now, Indian regulators are predicted to ban Free Basics in a decision expected within a week. What happened?

Facebook’s ads focus on the program “to connect India,” where only 20 percent of people are online, and about 30 percent have cell phones. (I found it also helps cost-conscious people who were already online save a few hundred rupees on data each month.) Absent from the ads, but also acknowledged by the company, is the fact that Free Basics helps Facebook, by funneling the next billion users towards its lucrative social network. (Users don’t have to create a Facebook account to access the rest of Free Basics, but Facebook is the first selection on the list. Facebook Messenger is also included in the offerings.)

So who could possibly be against this?

The net neutrality watchdogs. Free Basics only serves a tiny Facebook-endorsed portion of the Internet to users for free — a “walled garden” as opponents call it — while users must pay to access anything else on the web. As Backchannel has been chronicling for some time, they see it as a violation of the principle of net neutrality, that all things on the internet should be treated the same to preserve competition: no faster data connection for deep-pocketed companies, no charging consumers for some sites but not others, no cordoning off slices of the internet by private companies.

In December, a year after Free Basics launched in India, telecom regulators ordered Facebook’s Indian telecom partner to halt the nationwide rollout until they could decide how to police differential pricing, or charging different prices for different internet data — with Free Basics clearly implicated. (Press reports allege Free Basics has continued running, and the CEO of Babajob, one of the services included on the site, told me on January 28: “We still have users coming in.”) The regulators then offered Indians an opportunity to voice their opinion on the issue throughout January, promising a decision by the end of January that still hasn’t come but is expected in a week’s time. Yet leaks of the ruling have surfaced in recent days — and it appears Facebook will come out on the losing end.

To see how important this battle is to the company, with a possible domino effect across the other countries where Free Basics is offered, you only need to have witnessed how hard Facebook fought.

That brings us to the billboard bonanza: Facebook wasn’t leaving access to the world’s second largest home of potential web users (and the biggest for Facebook, since it’s banned in China) to chance — especially when it could cause a domino effect across other countries. Even before the latest dustup, Facebook had been stocking up goodwill with the country, meeting with Indian startups and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, an advocate of tech-centric initiatives. Since the December blowup, Zuckerberg has phoned key critics within India’s startup scene, and Facebook reps have been lobbying stakeholders in the capital of Delhi. Facebook paints opponents as elite scrooges stuck on “extreme” net neutrality principles, “even,” as Zuckerberg’s op-ed reads, “if it means leaving a billion people behind.” In December, Facebook launched a petition on the social network itself, asking users to support “digital equality,” the signatures of which were forwarded to regulators.

One regulator blasted the petition, calling it “a “crudely majoritarian and orchestrated opinion poll.” (The regulators wanted people to pen answers to four policy questions on differential pricing, not engage in clicktivism.) Many Indians were turned off by the ad campaign, which one press report estimated at $44 million — a conjecture that one Facebook rep called “way, way, blown-out-of-proportion high.”

Netizens have come back at Facebook with parody ads, John Oliver-esque PSAs, critical tweets from prominent Indian tech figures, and a deluge of their own letters to the regulators. Organizing the opposition movement has been a loose collective called SaveTheInternet.in, which has been wrangling the savvy Indian tech and startup scene to argue that this hurts not only net neutrality, but them.

That’s because at a time when Indian companies are emerging to compete with Silicon Valley, Free Basics lets one company decide what a swath of internet users get to see, making it harder for a little guy to be discovered in the internet wilds if they don’t join Free Basics. “Facebook is spending a lot of money on the billboards and the ads and the Modi hugging,” says Hey, Neighbor! founder Aravind Ravi-Sulekha, based in Bangalore. “Facebook says ‘we’re not a danger, we haven’t stifled the startup ecosystem yet.’ But they’re not very successful yet [in India]. I’m pretty sure Facebook, with their hacker culture, will figure it out, and at that point, it will be too late to stop them.”

Who’s right? Both sides proclaim they’re on the side of justice. So on the 11th hour of the decision, Backchannel headed to the Silicon Valley of India to better understand the stakes.