Jim Kimsey, a dot-com entrepreneur who helped turn a failed video game company into America Online, the giant dial-up service that helped bring the Internet to the masses, died on Tuesday at his home in McLean, Va. He was 76.

The cause was cancer, his son Mark said.

Long before Facebook or Twitter, Mr. Kimsey was a co-founder of AOL, connecting a nascent online audience with news and information as never before. Through its online chat rooms and email service, the company influenced a generation of Internet providers and left an imprint on popular American culture, the sound of a buzzing modem and its trademark “You’ve got mail!” entering the national lexicon. (It was the title of a 1998 Nora Ephron film with Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan.)

Mr. Kimsey steered AOL through its early days as its founding chairman and chief executive, but he largely avoided the spotlight. In 1995, the year Mr. Kimsey stepped down as chairman, The Washington Post called him a “behind-the-scenes power broker” whose name might lead the average person to “draw a blank.”

Indeed, one of his best known acts at AOL was handing power to someone else. Mr. Kimsey, a sort of elder statesman for the company, groomed another co-founder, Steve Case, at the time a young Internet marketing expert, to take over.

Mr. Case oversaw AOL’s expansion into a media conglomerate with a $220 billion market capitalization.

“I think one of the best things I ever did was let Steve run the company,” Mr. Kimsey told The Washington Post in 1995. “Today that one decision to get out of the way makes me look like a genius.”

In a statement on Tuesday, Mr. Case credited Mr. Kimsey with helping to make “the Internet part of everyday life.”

James Verlin Kimsey was born on Sept. 15, 1939, in Washington, D.C. He briefly attended Georgetown University before transferring to West Point, from which he graduated in 1962.

His military career involved three combat tours in the 1960s, first in the Dominican Republic and then in Vietnam.

After the war, Mr. Kimsey returned to the Washington area, where he raised his family.

Mr. Kimsey is survived by three sons, Michael, Mark and Raymond; six grandchildren; a sister, Eleanor; and a brother, Thomas. His marriage to the former Bronwen Krummeck ended in divorce.

In business, Mr. Kimsey had success as a local restaurateur. And in the 1980s, at the recommendation of a friend from West Point, he joined Control Video, a start-up online video game company.

When that venture failed, Mr. Kimsey helped reorganize it into Quantum Computer Services, which later became America Online. He oversaw the company during its 1992 public stock offering.

Mr. Kimsey stepped down as chairman in 1995, five years before Mr. Case helped engineer a $165 billion merger with Time Warner. Since then, AOL has receded to a shadow of its former self, a victim of the dot-com boom and bust it helped create.

In retirement, Mr. Kimsey focused on philanthropy, creating a family foundation that benefited education and the arts. He also donated $10 million to the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and was appointed by two presidents to sit on its board.

In 2001, then-Secretary of State Colin Powell named Mr. Kimsey chairman of the International Commission on Missing Persons, which addresses issues related to people missing because of wars, human rights violations and natural disasters.

Mr. Kimsey also indulged a passion for music, recording a country music album in 2012 after seeing the film “Crazy Heart.” The album, which he recorded under the pseudonym Verlin Jack, was titled “My First Rodeo.”