THE South by Southwest festival in March is always an exciting time for news about music, films and ideas.

The giant event in Austin, Tex., also features SXSW Interactive, which is dedicated to start-up companies and technology discussions.

Keeping tabs on the sprawling start-up scene at the five days of SXSW Interactive and beyond is tricky, but apps can help you navigate the landscape.

Startup News is a useful news roundup app that is free on iOS. It aggregates news about start-up topics like innovation, entrepreneurship, mergers, acquisitions and venture capital.

The app has a clear, readable interface and does a good job of combining images, headlines and introductory paragraphs. As well as aggregating relevant news on one page, the app organizes news articles under topics you’re interested in. Tapping on an article shows you a little more of its content; you can visit the source website to read the full article.

The app has a broad range of sources so it’s great for scanning up-to-the-minute headlines.

This is an iOS-only app, however, and while it’s good for quickly reading news snippets, it may not be the best app for finding in-depth articles about start-ups.

There is an Android app with the same name that does a similar job. It has many of the same features as the iOS Startup News app, including a bright and readable interface and many news sources.

This app does show a bit more news content, without requiring a visit to the article’s website. It is also free and a good way to follow developments in the start-up community.

Entrepreneur Daily is a start-up app worth downloading for two reasons. First, it has a magazinelike design and contains longer articles.

The app also includes inspiration, advice and ideas. So if you are actually participating in a start-up or eager to gain a deeper insight into start-ups, it could be more useful than a news aggregator app.

The app’s clear interface highlights images and makes it easy to filter articles by date, topic or popularity and share them on social media.

The app is free on iOS and Android, but because news is not its focus, it may be best used with other start-up apps.

Twitter soared in popularity because of SXSW. But it can seem daunting or even pointless if you’ve never tried it.

Don’t be afraid. Twitter is easy to learn, and it’s a great source of news on the start-up scene (including fresh news from events like SXSW).

The whole point of Twitter is to be a continuous “live” source of discussions, links to articles and ideas shared by its users. To use Twitter you set up a simple profile and search Twitter’s database for topics or people to follow — be they journalists, venture capitalists or even leaders of start-up companies.

Twitter is a great way to learn about news developments very early, sometimes ahead of any other sources. And one of the most interesting things about Twitter is how many influential people from the start-up community use it regularly.

Twitter is free on iOS, Android and Windows 10.

The news aggregator app Flipboard is one of my favorite ways to follow a topic because its gesture-based interface makes it very easy to browse articles.

The app can pull together news on many topics, including a subject like start-ups, venture capital and entrepreneurship. Flipboard is free on iOS and Android.

Finally, if you’re a devoted LinkedIn user, the Pulse app may be an interesting source of start-up news.

Like its rivals, Pulse collects news articles from many sources with a business-related theme. The app learns your preferences as you swipe right to save articles or left to indicate your disinterest.

The app isn’t specifically about delivering start-up news to you, but it’s an interesting way of speed-reading each day’s business happenings, including start-up-related articles. It’s free on iOS and Android, but you need a free LinkedIn account to make it work.

The innovative email app Spark has been popular on iPhones for a while, not least because of its clever Apple Watch integration. Now the app has made the leap to iPad, bringing its smart notifications, natural language search and other powers to the larger more businesslike screen of Apple’s tablet. Spark is free.