WASHINGTON — President Obama has said for years that he has finished his last campaign. But tell that to the team of former aides that has assembled to help him push for his Supreme Court nominee.

Using a tactic straight out of the president’s 2012 campaign playbook, a new group formed by those aides to fight for Judge Merrick B. Garland’s confirmation hosted Mr. Obama on Thursday on a “strategy call” for thousands of supporters and activists.

“We need to make sure the American people remind senators that they have a job to do,” Mr. Obama told those who phoned in. Speaking to any Republican senators who might be listening, he added: “Be fair. That’s something we all learned in kindergarten.”

In a familiar follow-up, Stephanie Cutter, the president’s 2012 deputy campaign manager, came on the line after Mr. Obama to remind listeners to “press ‘1’ to sign up and get involved.”

Ms. Cutter, who also worked in the West Wing for Mr. Obama, will oversee the efforts by the new group, to be called the Constitutional Responsibility Project. Anita Dunn, the former White House communications director, is handling the news media, along with Amy Brundage, a veteran Obama aide. Also involved are Julianna Smoot, the chief fund-raiser for Mr. Obama’s campaigns; Paul Tewes, Mr. Obama’s top field operative in 2008; and Katie Beirne Fallon, the president’s last legislative director.

Established in recent weeks as a nonprofit organization, the group will solicit donations, develop advertising, coordinate messaging, help manage operatives in the field, respond to attacks on Judge Garland and collect opposition research on Republican opponents.

It is essentially a miniature version of Obama for America, the formal name of Mr. Obama’s presidential campaign operations in 2008 and 2012, but with a new mission: to serve as an umbrella organization for the constellation of liberal groups that typically wage fights on behalf of Democratic court nominees.

Ms. Cutter and the other Obama alumni have held strategy meetings twice a week with representatives of MoveOn.org, the Center for American Progress, Americans United for Change, People for the American Way, the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights and others.

“No one progressive and Democratic group can compete with the Koch brothers, which is why we believed it was essential to launch a coalition-based campaign,” Ms. Brundage said. “The Republican Senate obstruction has brought together a large and diverse coalition unlike any other nomination fight in recent memory to fight for a fair process.”

Starting Monday, in fact, the Judicial Crisis Network, a conservative group, will begin a $2 million television, radio and digital media campaign in New Hampshire, Ohio, Colorado, North Dakota and West Virginia, according to Carrie Severino, the group’s policy director.

The campaign will target three Republicans and three Democrats: to thank certain lawmakers like Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, for standing his ground to block the nomination; and to put pressure on other lawmakers like Senator Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia, by pointing to issues like what the group calls Judge Garland’s anti-gun record.

Even with this relatively large early media buy, leaders of some of the conservative groups opposing Judge Garland say they suspect the liberal groups could end up with more resources at their disposal, given the dozens of different organizations, from labor unions, to environmental, women’s, civil rights and gay rights groups that have joined the Obama-backed campaign.

“There is no question, in my mind, we are going to be outnumbered,” said Curt Levey, the executive director of FreedomWorks Foundation.

But Mr. Levey said conservatives still had the advantage, because to force a vote on the nomination in the Senate would take at least 13 Republican votes if it ever got out of the Judiciary Committee and onto the Senate floor, which is unlikely, no matter how much noise the liberal groups make.

On both sides of what is likely to be a prolonged fight, a key challenge is money.

For the liberal groups, the presence of the former Obama advisers could be a draw. But many potential donors have financial relationships with the existing groups, and choosing which organization gets the next big check could be difficult. Officials for the new group declined to discuss their fund-raising

MoveON, which is organizing more than 50 rallies around the United States on Monday, mostly at offices of Republican senators, sent out a solicitation Thursday asking for donations of anywhere from $3 to $1,500 or more.

“Now, for the first time in decades, liberal justices could take charge of the Supreme Court — and not just for the next year or two, but possibly for a generation,” the solicitation by MoveOn.org sent out Thursday said. People for the American Way had its own solicitation effort underway.

On the conservative side, fund-raising efforts are also going on, although leaders of the groups declined to discuss how much they hoped to collect to finance their campaign.

For both sides, avoiding conflicts among diverse groups may end up being tricky given how long the nomination could be stalled.

That is in part, the former Obama advisers said Thursday, why they have created their new group. But an open question for leaders of some existing groups is whether money raised by the Constitutional Responsibility Project may hamper their fund-raising. Those groups have in the past used Supreme Court fights as a way to motivate their supporters and fill their coffers, and even if the project funnels some of the money it raises to the groups, there will still be a competition for resources.

There could also be differences in approach when it comes to messaging and advertising. Some groups may want to produce attack ads aimed at Republican senators who refuse to consider Judge Garland’s nomination. Others may favor softer approaches focused on the judge’s personal background. How the former Obama officials navigate those differences could determine how much grumbling there is among the groups.

Stephen Spaulding, legal director of Common Cause, one of dozens of liberal groups working on the Supreme Court effort, said the Obama group could help coordinate the effort. But even more important, he said, would be enlisting key Republican voices like Alberto R. Gonzales, the former Bush administration attorney general, and Kenneth W. Starr, a former appeals court judge who investigated President Bill Clinton, who have already called for the Senate to act.

“These kinds of statements are almost more important,” Mr. Spaulding said. “What we need are voices that senators who are wavering will listen to.”